# Elections Organizer Guide

TEXTING BASICS
--------------

Welcome to the Texting Program Organizer Guide! This is intended
to be near-comprehensive resource for getting your campaign's
texting program off the ground. It covers the digital tools and
infrastructure you'll need to set up, the volunteer materials
you'll need to prepare, how to build up your team, and how to
manage Spoke.

Peer-to-peer texting is an immensely powerful tool for Left
electoral campaigns to unleash the potential of trained
volunteers to efficiently reach large numbers of voters with the
campaign’s core message, while empowering those volunteers to
have real and meaningful conversations with both voters and
supporters.

Peer-to-peer texting programs can be broken down into two major
functions:
 **voter contact**and **supporter mobilization**. Voter contact means texting lists of voters in order to
identify their level of support (voter ID), persuade them to
support your candidate, and get confirmed supporters to turn out
to vote (GOTV). Supporter mobilization means texting your
campaign’s list of supporters (volunteers, donors, website
signups) in order to recruit them to volunteer, attend an event,
donate to the campaign, etc. This guide will have a focus on
voter contact, though the core principles and systems described
here are generally applicable to both types of texting.

DIGITAL TOOLS
-------------

### Spoke

This guide will describe how to set up a peer-to-peer texting
program using Spoke Rewired, which we believe offers the most
powerful set of features at the lowest
price ($0.01/segment) of any tool on the market. Spoke
Rewired is a highly scaleable, dynamic and easy-to-use tool for
admins and texters.

### Slack

You will need a highly reliable online communications platform
in order to coordinate your peer-to-peer texting program. Slack
is a free and easy-to-use online messaging program that allows
your team to have multiple live conversations, neatly organized
into different channels and threads. While some newer
open-source tools (e.g., Discord) can now provide
similar functionality, Slack is still generally considered to be
the most powerful and reliable and will therefore be recommended
in this guide. Do not try to coordinate your texting program via
email, WhatsApp, or group text. Slack’s ability to keep your
conversations clear and organized makes it well-worth the
(relatively minor) extra training and support needed to get
volunteers onboarded and comfortable using the platform.

### Google Drive

Admin resources and volunteer materials can be easily created,
stored, and organized using Google Drive, Docs, Sheets, Forms,
and Slides. This guide will provide templates of said resources
and materials that you can copy, edit, and adapt for your
campaign’s texting program.

GETTING STARTED: ADMIN INFRASTRUCTURE
-------------------------------------

A peer-to-peer texting program is a kind of distributed
organizing system, which means it requires a significant
up-front investment of time and attention to prepare the digital
infrastructure that admins and volunteers will rely upon to
accomplish their work in an entirely online and remote setting.
This section will cover the admin infrastructure you’ll need in
place before you launch your texting program.

### Sign up for Spoke Rewired

If you don't yet have a Spoke Rewired account, you can sign up
for one
[here](https://politicsrewired.com/signup/). You
should hear back and be granted access to your new account in a
matter of days.

### Acquire Voter Data

You will need to purchase voter data from your state or county
elections office(s), VAN, or if you’re in California, PDI. You
only need to purchase voters with valid cell numbers, since
peer-to-peer texting only reaches cell phones, not landlines. If
you’re in California, PDI generally offers the most accurate and
up-to-date data available. You can quickly and easily filter
various PDI lists
[here](https://www.politicaldata.com/online-counts-reports/), searching your district and then applying the “HAS MOBILE
PHONE” criteria to your search. You can then further narrow your
search by various demographic information, depending on your
budget for data and texting.

### Develop Voter ID Script

A key component of your voter contact texting will be voter ID
work: texting campaigns designed to identify voters’ level of
support for your candidate on a 1-5 scale. You will need to
develop a script ahead of time that includes an initial message
that will be sent to your entire voter universe asking if they
will support your candidate, as well as messages designed to
respond to voters who reply indicating varying levels of
support. It’s important that you take time to carefully craft a
clear and concise initial message that introduces your
candidate, summarizes their most central message, and asks for
support. You should send your draft script to campaign
leadership for feedback and approval well in advance of
launching your texting program. You can request a sample Voter
ID script outline at [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

### Create Campaign Tracker

If you’re building and managing texting campaigns in your own
Spoke account, it’s best to have a campaign tracker spreadsheet
that will help your admin team track and coordinate its work.
Your campaign tracker will be where you can quickly and easily
see all your texting campaigns, their number and current status,
who built them, and any notes left by the builder. It will also
provide a checklist for proofing campaigns. You can view a
request a campaign tracker template at
[[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

### Sign up for Rebrandly

You will frequently need to send links while texting voters and
supporters. You can generate links that are short, branded, and
less likely to be blocked by cell carriers by creating a
Rebrandly account and purchasing a custom domain. Rebrandly is
free to use and domains typically cost between $2-$35. Once you
purchase a domain, you can create unlimited custom links
associated with that doman. You can create an account with
Rebrandly
[here](https://app.rebrandly.com/sign-up).

GETTING STARTED: VOLUNTEER MATERIALS
------------------------------------

Volunteers are the beating heart of any distributed organizing
program and peer-to-peer texting perfectly illustrates that
point. Enabling and empowering volunteers with clear and
thorough resources is key to running a successful texting
program. Three online resources are absolutely critical:
training slides, your Team FAQ, and your Slack workspace.

### Training Slides

Your training slides will be what you use to train new volunteer
texters before they are invited into Slack or Spoke. Training
slides should provide a reasonably comprehensive overview of
what a texting volunteer will need to text using Spoke and
coordinate with your team on Slack. Ideally, all volunteer
texters should attend a live online training that reviews the
training slides, though a pre-recorded video covering the slides
can also be used. You can request a template for your
training slides at [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

### Team FAQ

No matter how comprehensive your training slides are, your
volunteer texters are bound to have plenty of questions. Your
Team FAQ will be the first place texting volunteers look in
order to find answers to their common questions. This will allow
your admin team (and/or moderators) to focus their attention on
answering more complex questions in Slack that can’t be easily
addressed in the FAQ. The FAQ should include common questions
from both texters and voters. It should cover biographical and
political summaries of the candidate, as well as succinct
descriptions of their position on the most important and
controversial issues of the race. You can request a
template for your Team FAQ at [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection)

### Slack Workspace

If your campaign does not already use Slack, you’ll want to set
up a new workspace for your texting team. You can read how to
create a new workspace
[here](https://slack.com/help/articles/206845317-Create-a-Slack-workspace). Once in your new workspace, create a new #texting channel and
set the channel description so that volunteers know that all
questions and conversations about texting should happen here.
Then, set the channel description in #general to make it clear
that that’s where all non-texting-related announcements and
discussion will take place. Once channel descriptions are set,
edit the channel topics to include important links that
volunteers will regularly be referencing while texting. For
example, you can set the topic for #texting include links to the
FAQ, training slides, and the candidate’s platform page. The
most important thing to post to the #general channel is
the  link texting volunteers will need to join Spoke. You
may also want to create a private #admins channel for those who
are managing your texting program. Links posted as channel
topics will need to be shortened, ideally using branded links
created in rebrandly. (If your campaign already has a Slack
workspace, then all you’ll need to do is create a new #texting
channel that includes links volunteer materials and to join
Spoke in the channel topic. You’ll also likely want to create a
private #texting-admins channel.)

Just as important as the structure of your Slack workspace is
the culture you create in it with your volunteer texting team.
Make sure to set a
[workplace icon](https://slack.com/help/articles/204379773-Upload-a-Slack-icon) so that your workspace looks official and people are excited to
join. You’ll also want to set a [profile photo](https://slack.com/help/articles/115005506003-Upload-a-profile-photo) and encourage all other admins and texters to do the same, so that
people can get to know one another. (Profile photos don’t necessarily
have to be a picture of the person; they can be of a favorite place,
pet, etc.) Finally, it’s worth taking a little extra time to add
some fun [custom emojis](https://slack.com/slack-tips/upload-custom-slack-emoji-to-express-your-unique-office-culture) to your workspace. You can browse a free library of custom emojis
[here](https://slackmojis.com/).

BUILDING YOUR TEXTING TEAM
--------------------------

### Recruiting Volunteers

Once you’ve prepared your admin infrastructure and volunteer
materials, you’ll need to recruit your team of volunteer
texters. Reaching out to local chapter members and/or people who
have signed up to volunteer are good places to start. Since most
down-ballot races have relatively modest and manageable voter
lists, you should be able to handle your voter universe with
between 5-15 well-trained and committed volunteers, depending on
the size of your voter universe and the technical literacy of
your volunteers. In general, it’s better to have fewer texting
volunteers that are competent and reliable, rather than large
numbers of volunteers who demand constant support and are
flakey. When reaching out to volunteers, briefly describe the
texting program and why it’s important, then invite them to a
live online training to get started!

### Onboarding Volunteers

The way in which you onboard new texting volunteers is an
important mechanism for ensuring that everyone on your team has
access to the same resources and is prepared to begin texting
with your campaign. The first step is to invite new texter
recruits to a live online training (Zoom is a good option). Make
sure they register to attend the training, so you collect their
contact information. At the end of the training, you should
invite all those in attendance to join your Slack workspace by
sharing the custom invite link in the chat. Allocate 5-10
minutes at the end of the training to actively support and
troubleshoot people creating a Slack account and getting into
the workspace. You can then post the Spoke login information in
Slack so that texting volunteers are able to create a Spoke
account, which they will need to start texting. Going through
this ordered process will guarantee that all your texters are
trained, in Slack, and in Spoke. Do not invite new recruits
directly into Spoke without first making sure they are trained
and in Slack. This will only cause you headaches down the
line.

Note: If you want to add an extra layer of training and
accountability to your onboarding process, you can also require
new trainees to pass a simple online quiz that covers the
training material. Those that pass the quiz should be
automatically invited to your Slack workspace.

### Schedule Texting Sessions

Texting is usually a periodic activity, with interchanging
periods of high activity and low activity, centered around Voter
ID and GOTV campaigns. To provide a reliable schedule for your
volunteers and to ensure that they’ll have the live support of
admins or moderators in Slack while texting, you’ll want to
schedule specific texting sessions. A good rule of thumb is to
schedule 2-3 sessions, each several hours, over 2-3 consecutive
days when you think most of your volunteers will be available
during the week following your first training. For example, you
may schedule texting sessions from Mon-Wed from 6:00-9:00 PM
after holding a weekend training. After your first complete
session, you’ll get a better sense of how long it’s taking your
team of volunteers to get through texts and can schedule
additions sessions as needed.

MANAGING SPOKE
--------------

### Building Campaigns

There are a number of ways to organize and customize how you
build and manage campaigns in Spoke, but it’s crucial that you
take a systematic approach in order to avoid errors and ensure
consistency between campaigns created by different admins. For a
detailed step-by-step guide to campaign building, go
[here](https://docs.spokerewired.com/article/34-build-a-campaign).

### Scripting Initial Messages

A campaign’s initial message will be sent to its entire voter or
supporter universe and will play a large role in determining
both how many people respond to start a conversation and the
nature of those conversations. Initial messages should be clear,
concise, and compelling. They can usually be broken down into
three parts: an introduction, an argument, and an ask. The
introduction greets the textee and introduces the texter. The
argument makes a case for why the textee should yes to the ask.
The ask makes a direct request of the textee, including any
logistical details (e.g., date/time) they may need to give an
informed answer. For more details about how to write effective
scripts and for example scripts, please
[read this article](https://docs.spokerewired.com/article/120-writing-scripts).

*To learn more about managing campaigns and administering
Spoke, please browse our [Knowledge Base](https://docs.spokerewired.com/).*

 